Version 1.1 (Feb 9, 2023)

DNS Abuse Techniques Matrix

FIRST DNS Abuse Special Interest Group

https://www.first.org/global/sigs/dns

Introduction

This report from the DNS Abuse Special Interest Group (SIG) at FIRST
provides advice for incident response teams responding to incidents
involving DNS abuse. Crisply defining the edges of what is and is not
DNS abuse is a challenge. Many organizations have weighed in on
defining DNS abuse as relating to some combination of phishing,
malware, unsolicited email, botnets, fraud, or a combination of some
or all of these abuse types. The FIRST DNS Abuse SIG has recognized a
gap in this conversation, which is that these categories do not give
actionable advice to incident responders. This report therefore aims
to complement existing efforts in DNS abuse studies by providing
common examples of techniques used in incidents that responders and
security teams see, and providing a stakeholder list for who might be
able to help the incident responders detect, mitigate, or prevent
specific techniques used for abuse.

The advice currently takes the form of a matrix indicating whether a
specific stakeholder can directly help with a specific technique. By
“help”, we mean whether the stakeholder is in a position to detect,
mitigate, or prevent the abuse technique. We have organized this
information under three spreadsheets covering these incident response
actions. For example, during an incident involving DNS cache
poisoning, the team can go to the mitigation tab and look at the row
for DNS cache poisoning, to find which stakeholders they might be able
to contact to help mitigate the incident.

The DNS ecosystem is complex, with many stakeholders and operating
models. Some of the techniques listed may have benign uses, so it's
not as simple as “these techniques should never be
allowed”. However, in the context of incident response, the
assumption is that an incident is occurring, so therefore whatever
techniques the adversary used to initiate or maintain that incident
are malicious or are against the security policy of the organization,
or both. Incident responders should adhere to responsible collection
within their jurisdictional boundaries. The DNS Abuse SIG is agnostic
as to whether any of the listed techniques are abusive of the DNS in
general. This report is composed from the point of view of assuming
that a technique is used maliciously in the particular incident, and
therefore bringing light as to who can take action by detecting,
mitigating, or preventing.

Some techniques may be used in parallel with attacks involving the
DNS;for example, BGP hijacking or TLS certificate impersonation. Such
techniques are out of scope, this document focuses just on DNS abuse
techniques.

It could be useful to note that there are other policy-related,
governmental, and judicial avenues that can be contacted in response
to an incident, which as of this version of the document haven't been
included. For example, The Budapest Convention and other international
instruments provide a mechanism for both evidence retrieval and
suspension of infrastructure across country borders. The first step
for a foreign law enforcement investigator will often be an informal
preservation request, to ensure that data is not lost pending a formal
legal request (that is, an MLAT).

Terms

The three dimensions of the matrix (action, technique, and
stakeholder) use the following definitions of terms.

Actions

The definitions are linked to the FIRST CSIRT services framework v2.1,
for services that a CSIRT might provide.

■ Detect – identify potential incidents. Services: Monitoring and
Detection; Incident Report Acceptance. Note: The phase of incident
management where the IR team wants to confirm and gather additional
detection tools and signatures is part of the Mitigation phase, not
Detection. The Detection action focuses only on initial detection of
the incident.

■ Mitigate – contain an incident and restore secure
operations. Services: Mitigation and Recovery.

■ Prevent – using DNS-specific steps, make it less likely incidents
of this type will occur in the future. Services: Knowledge transfer
(including to internal IT teams); Vulnerability Response; also relates
to detection (possibly updating the signatures and detection rules)
and recovery (during recovery, should the system be reconfigured to
prevent recurrence). Note that broad anti-malware prevention is out of
scope. Of course everyone should do the broad anti- malware practices,
see for example Best Practices | M3AAWG.

Techniques

1. DGAs (Domain Generation Algorithms) –
https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1568/002/

2. Domain name compromise – The wrongfully taking control of a domain
name from the rightful name holder. Compromised domains can be used
for different kinds of malicious activity like sending spam or
phishing, for distributing malware or as botnet command and control -
https://www.icann.org/groups/ssac/documents/sac-007-en.

3. Lame delegations – Lame delegations occur as a result of expired
nameserver domains allowing attackers to take control of the domain
resolution by re-registering this expired nameserver domain -
https://blog.apnic.net/2021/03/16/the-prevalence-persistence-perils-of-
lame-nameservers/.

4. DNS cache poisoning – also known as DNS spoofing, is a type of
cyber attack in which an attacker corrupts a DNS resolver's cache by
injecting false DNS records, causing the resolver to records
controlled by the attacker -
https://capec.mitre.org/data/definitions/142.html

5. DNS rebinding – a type of attack where a malicious website directs
a client to a local network address, allowing the attacker to bypass
the same-origin policy and gain access to the victim's local resources
- https://capec.mitre.org/data/definitions/275.html

6. DNS server compromise – Attacker gains administrative privileges on
an open recursive DNS server, authoritative DNS server, organizational
recursive DNS server, or ISP-operated recursive DNS server.

7. Stub resolver hijacking – The attacker compromises the Operating
System of a computer or a phone with malicious code that intercepts
and responds to DNS queries with rogue or malicious responses

8. Local recursive resolver hijacking – Consumer Premise Equipment
(CPE), such as home routers, often provide DNS recursion on the local
network. If the CPE device is compromised, the attacker can change the
recursive resolver behavior; for example, by changing responses.

9. On-path DNS attack – “Attackers intercept communication between a
user and a DNS server and provide different destination IP addresses
pointing to malicious sites.”
(https://www.imperva.com/learn/application-security/dns-hijacking-redirection/)

10. DoS against the DNS – Multiple systems sending malicious traffic
to a target at the same time.

11. DNS as a vector for DoS – "Adversaries may attempt to cause a
denial of service by reflecting a high-volume of network traffic to a
target. This type of Network DoS takes advantage of a third-party
server intermediary that hosts and will respond to a given spoofed
source IP address. This third-party server is commonly termed a
reflector. An adversary accomplishes a reflection attack by sending
packets to reflectors with the spoofed address of the victim. Two
prominent protocols that have enabled Reflection Amplification Floods
are DNS and NTP through the use of several others in the wild have
been documented." These Reflection and Amplification Floods can be
directed against components of the DNS, like authoritative
nameservers, rendering them unresponsive.”
(https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1498/002/)

12. Dynamic DNS resolution (as obfuscation technique) – Adversaries
may dynamically establish connections to command and control
infrastructure to evade common detections and remediations. This may
be achieved by using malware that shares a common algorithm with the
infrastructure the adversary uses to receive the malware's
communications. These calculations can be used to dynamically adjust
parameters such as the domain name IP address or port number the
malware uses for command and control.
(https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1568/)

13. Dynamic DNS resolution: Fast flux (as obfuscation technique) –
“Adversaries may use Fast Flux DNS to hide a command and control
channel behind an array of rapidly changing IP addresses linked to a
single domain resolution. This technique uses a fully qualified domain
name with multiple IP addresses assigned to it which are swapped with
high frequency using a combination of round robin IP addressing and
short Time-To-Live (TTL) for a DNS resource record.”
(https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1568/001/)

14. Infiltration and exfiltration via the DNS – Exfiltration via the
DNS requires a delegated domain or, if the domain does not exist in
the public DNS, the operation of a resolver preloaded with that
domain's zone file information and configured to receive and respond
to the queries sent by the compromised devices.

15. Malicious registration of (effective) second level domains – For
example, before attacking a victim, adversaries purchase or register
domains from an ICANN-accredited registrar that can be used during
targeting. See also CAPEC-630.

16. Creation of malicious subdomains under dynamic DNS providers –
Before attacking a victim, adversaries purchase or create domains from
an entity other than a registrar or registry that provides subdomains
under domains they own and control. See also
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_DNS.

17. Compromise of a non-DNS server to conduct abuse – Internet attack
infrastructure is a broad category, and this covers any non-DNS
server. Many compromised servers, such as web servers or mail servers,
interact with the DNS or may be instrumental in conducting DNS
abuse. For example, compromised mail servers are one technique that
may be used to send phishing emails.

18. Spoofing or otherwise using unregistered domain names – In a
context where a domain name is expected (such as the From header in
mail or a URL in a web page or message body), supplying a domain name
not controlled by the attacker and that is not controlled by or
registered to a legitimate registrant.

19. Spoofing of a registered domain – In a context where a domain name
is expected (such as the From header in mail or a URL in a web page or
message body), supplying a domain name not controlled by the attacker
and that is in fact controlled by or registered to a legitimate
registrant.

20. DNS tunneling - tunneling another protocol over DNS – The DNS
protocol serves an administrative function in computer networking and
thus may be very common in environments. DNS traffic may also be
allowed even before network authentication is completed. DNS packets
contain many fields and headers in which data can be concealed.  Often
known as DNS tunneling, adversaries may abuse DNS to communicate with
systems under their control within a victim network while also
mimicking normal expected traffic.
(https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1071/004/)

21. DNS beacons - C2 communication – Successive or periodic DNS
queries to a command & control server, either to exfiltrate data or
await further commands from the C2.

Stakeholders

Many organizations may act in different stakeholder roles at different
times. At small and midsize organizations, the same individual may act
in different roles at different times. However, these different
stakeholders have distinct capabilities and so we have organized them
as separate.  Even if one organization has different teams that act as
different stakeholder roles, it may be helpful to attempt to contact
the relevant team that performs a stakeholder capability.

It is important for incident responders to be mindful that not every
stakeholder will have their best interests at heart. Contacted
stakeholders may be distracted, immature, or at worst intentionally
operating infrastructure to support abuse. Organizations doing the
latter will be unreceptive at best and deceptive at worst. If you are
unsure about whether to proceed with contacting a stakeholder, check
with your peers.

1. Registrars – an organization that allows registration of domains
under a TLD -
https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-terms/registrar-en

2. Registries – organizations responsible for maintaining the database
of domains for a TLD -
https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-terms/registry-en

3. Authoritative Operators –
https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-
terms/authoritative-name-server-en

4. Domain name resellers –
https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/reseller-2013-05-03-en

5. Recursive Operators – Organizations operating either a private or
public recursive resolver

6. Network Operators – Organizations operating an autonomous system
(AS). We assume an organization with this capability is not running a
recursive DNS server. This column means netflow and BGP data, and
excludes (as a matter of a clarity choice here) passive DNS.

7. Application Service Provider – Software as a Service provider (like
Google Docs), see
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:17788:ed-1:v1:en for SaaS
definition.

8. Hosting Provider –
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_hosting_service. If the hosting
provider is a bulletproof hosting provider or otherwise complicit in
providing attack infrastructure, then at best there is no good that
will come from contacting them and at worst it will expose the team to
reprisals.

9. Threat Intelligence Provider – Threat intelligence providers
aggregate, transform, analyze, interpret, or enrich intelligence to
provide the necessary context for decision-making processes. CTI is
considered as sharing and analysis only.

10. Device, OS, & Application Software Developers – Software
developers who write the code or develop DNS resolver software or are
responsible for updating an imported DNS resolver version in their
software project.

11. Domain Registrants – “an individual or entity who registers a
domain name”
https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-terms/registrant-en. In
the case of the malicious registration rows, this stakeholder is
modeled as the actual human who made the malicious registration.

12. End User – Everyone who uses the Internet (who is not performing
one of the other stakeholder capabilities listed).

13. Law Enforcement and Public Safety Authorities – Government
organizations with authority to enforce laws or act in the public
interest. Such organizations typically become aware of an issue
because of:

a. Ongoing investigation in which LE technique gives unique insight.

b. Victim complaints provide information indicating the abuse, often
relying upon collaboration with technical SMEs to help the
organization understand the evidence.

14. CSIRTs / ISACs – Computer Security Incident Response Teams /
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers. This column models
exclusively the capability of the team or center. Each CSIRT and ISAC
also is an end user of services, a registrant, may be a threat intel
provider, etc.  When the CSIRT or ISAC (organization) is performing
those stakeholder capability, use those columns.

15. Incident responder – The Computer Security Incident Response Team
that is internal to the impacted organization.

Examples of Techniques

The SIG has collected examples of various techniques and made the
available via the FIRST.org website under the DNS Abuse SIG homepage:

https://www.first.org/global/sigs/dns/dns-abuse-examples

This list of examples will continue to be updated as more are curated.

JPCERT/CC has published a list of phishing URLs that demonstrate
examples of techniques including domain generation algorithms (DGAs)
and malicious registrations of effective SLDs.

Nominet published an explanation of how dangling DNS entries can lead
to vulnerability to the lame delegation and on-path DNS attack
techniques.

The IRS published a warning against SMS scams making use of malicious
registration as well as spoofing the target organization.

Advice for Incident Responders

The following spreadsheets represent our advice on what kind of
organizations might be productively contacted at different incident
response phases for different DNS abuse techniques.  The Budapest
Convention and other networks provide a mechanism for both evidence
retrieval and suspension of infrastructure across country borders. The
Convention sets expectations, for example “the first step for an
investigator will often be an informal preservation request, to ensure
that data is not lost pending a formal legal request (MLAT)”.

Abuse Matrices

Key

: The entity has the capability to detect / mitigate / prevent the threat

: The entity lacks the capability to detect / mitigate / prevent the threat

■ DGA: domain generation algorithm

■ eSLD: effective second-level domain

■ eSLD: effective second-level domain

■ pDNS: passive DNS traffic analysis
